doc: Add MQTT high-level description (#13125)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/reference/networking/mqtt.rst

.. _mqtt_socket_interface:

MQTT
####

Overview
********

MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) is an application layer protocol

> which works on top of the TCP/IP. It is desiged as an lightweight

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which works on top of the TCP/IP stack. It is a lightweight
```

publish/subscribe messaging transport for machine-to-machine communication.
For more information about the protocol itself, see http://mqtt.org/.

Zephyr provides an MQTT client library built on top of BSD sockets API. The

> library is configurable at a per-client basis, with support for MQTT in versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
library is configurable at a per-client basis, with support for MQTT versions
```

3.1.0 and 3.1.1. The Zephyr MQTT implementation can be used with either plain

> sockets and communicate over TCP, or with secure sockets and communicate over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sockets communicating over TCP, or with secure sockets communicating over
```

TLS. See :ref:`bsd_sockets_interface` for more information about Zephyr sockets.

> MQTT clients require MQTT server to connect to. Such server, called an MQTT Broker,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT clients require an MQTT server to connect to. Such a server, called an MQTT Broker,
```

> is responsible for managing client subcribtions and distributing messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is responsible for managing client subscriptions and distributing messages
```

published by clients. There are many implementations of MQTT brokers, one of them
being Eclipse Mosquitto. See https://mosquitto.org/ for more information about
the Eclipse Mosquitto project.

Sample usage
************

To create an MQTT client, a client context structure and buffers need to be
defined:

.. code-block:: c

   /* Buffers for MQTT client. */
   static u8_t rx_buffer[256];
   static u8_t tx_buffer[256];

   /* MQTT client context */
   static struct mqtt_client client_ctx;

Multiple MQTT client instances can be created in the application and managed
independently. Additionally, a structure for MQTT Broker address information

> needs to be defined. This structure have to be accessible throughout the lifespan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is needed. This structure must be accessible throughout the lifespan
```

of the MQTT client and can be shared among MQTT clients:

.. code-block:: c

   /* MQTT Broker address information. */
   static struct sockaddr_storage broker;

An MQTT client library will notify MQTT events to the application through a

> callback function. Therefore, one needs to be created to handle respective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
callback function created to handle respective
```

events:

.. code-block:: c

   void mqtt_evt_handler(struct mqtt_client *client,
                         const struct mqtt_evt *evt)
   {
      switch (evt->type) {
         /* Handle events here. */
      }
   }

For a list of possible events, see :ref:`mqtt_api_reference`.

> In order to be usable, the client context structure needs to be initalized and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client context structure needs to be initialized and
```

> set up. An example configuration for TCP transport is show below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
set up before it can be used. An example configuration for TCP transport is shown below:
```

.. code-block:: c

   mqtt_client_init(&client_ctx);

   /* MQTT client configuration */
   client_ctx.broker = &broker;
   client_ctx.evt_cb = mqtt_evt_handler;
   client_ctx.client_id.utf8 = (u8_t *)"zephyr_mqtt_client";

>    client_ctx.client_id.size = strlen("zephyr_mqtt_client");

Reviewer 2: It probably does not matter much for example code but it is better to write this

```
client_ctx.client_id.size = sizeof("zephyr_mqtt_client") - 1;
```
That way we avoid a function call as the sizeof() is evaluated at compile time.

   client_ctx.password = NULL;
   client_ctx.user_name = NULL;
   client_ctx.protocol_version = MQTT_VERSION_3_1_1;
   client_ctx.transport.type = MQTT_TRANSPORT_NON_SECURE;

   /* MQTT buffers configuration */
   client_ctx.rx_buf = rx_buffer;
   client_ctx.rx_buf_size = sizeof(rx_buffer);
   client_ctx.tx_buf = tx_buffer;
   client_ctx.tx_buf_size = sizeof(tx_buffer);

> Once all set up, the MQTT client can connect to the MQTT broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the configuration is set up, the MQTT client can connect to the MQTT broker.
```

> In order to do that, ``mqtt_connect`` function should be called, which will create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Call the ``mqtt_connect`` function, which will create the
```

> appropriate socket, establish TCP/TLS connection and send `MQTT CONNECT` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
appropriate socket, establish a TCP/TLS connection, and send an `MQTT CONNECT` message.
```

> Afterwards, application should call ``mqtt_input`` function to process the response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When notified, the application should call the ``mqtt_input`` function to process the response
```

received. Note, that ``mqtt_input`` is a non-blocking function, therefore the

> application should use socket ``poll`` to wait for the response to be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application should use socket ``poll`` to wait for the response.
```

> If the connection was successfull, ``MQTT_EVT_CONNACK`` will be notified to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the connection was successful, ``MQTT_EVT_CONNACK`` will be notified to the
```

application through the callback function.

.. code-block:: c

   rc = mqtt_connect(&client_ctx);
   if (rc != 0) {
      return rc;
   }

   fds[0].fd = client_ctx.transport.tcp.sock;
   fds[0].events = ZSOCK_POLLIN;
   poll(fds, 1, K_MSEC(5000));

   mqtt_input(&client_ctx);

   if (!connected) {
      mqtt_abort(&client_ctx);
   }

> In the above code snippet, it is expected that MQTT callback function will set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above code snippet, the MQTT callback function should set the
```

> `connected` flag upon successfull connection. If the connection fails at MQTT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``connected`` flag upon a successful connection. If the connection fails at the MQTT
```

> level or timeout occurs, the connection will be aborted, and underlying socket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
level or a timeout occurs, the connection will be aborted, and the underlying socket
```

closed.

After the connection is established, an application needs to call ``mqtt_input``

> and ``mqtt_live`` functions periodically in order to process incoming data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ``mqtt_live`` functions periodically to process incoming data
```

and upkeep the connection. If an MQTT message is received, an MQTT callback

> function will be called and appropriate event notified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function will be called and an appropriate event notified.
```

> The connection can be closed by calling ``mqtt_disconnect`` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection can be closed by calling the ``mqtt_disconnect`` function.
```

> Zephyr provides sample code utilizing MQTT client API . See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zephyr provides sample code utilizing the MQTT client API. See
```

:ref:`mqtt-publisher-sample` for more information.

Using MQTT with TLS
*******************

> Zephyr MQTT library can be used with TLS transport for secure communication.

Reviewer: Let's merge this into one sentence:
```
The Zephyr MQTT library can be used with TLS transport for secure communication
by selecting a secure transport type (``MQTT_TRANSPORT_SECURE``)
and some additional configuration information:
```

To configure client instance to use secure TLS connection, a different transport
type has to be selected and some additional configuration is needed.

.. code-block:: c

   client_ctx.transport.type = MQTT_TRANSPORT_SECURE;

   struct mqtt_sec_config *tls_config = &client_ctx.transport.tls.config;

   tls_config->peer_verify = 2;
   tls_config->cipher_list = NULL;
   tls_config->sec_tag_list = m_sec_tags;
   tls_config->sec_tag_count = ARRAY_SIZE(m_sec_tags);
   tls_config->hostname = MQTT_BROKER_HOSTNAME;

> In this sample code, ``m_sec_tags`` array holds a list of tags, referencing TLS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this sample code, the ``m_sec_tags`` array holds a list of tags, referencing TLS
```

> credentials that MQTT library should use for authentication. We do not specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
credentials that the MQTT library should use for authentication. We do not specify
```

> ``cipher_list``, hence it'll allow to use all ciphersuites available in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``cipher_list``, to allow the use of all cipher suites available in the system.
```

We set ``hostname`` field to broker hostname, which is required for server
authentication. Finally, we enforce peer certificate verification by setting

> ``peer_verify`` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``peer_verify`` field.
```

> Note, that TLS credentials referenced by ``m_sec_tags`` array need to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, that TLS credentials referenced by the ``m_sec_tags`` array must be
```

registered in the system first. For more information on how to do that, refer

> to :ref:`secure sockets documentation<secure_sockets_interafce>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to :ref:`secure sockets documentation <secure_sockets_interface>`.
```
